---

# Day 15: Climate sensitivity definitions

A short note that defines terms used in our discussions of climate sensitivity and feedback

## Definitions

$E$ ($J\,m^{-2}$)
: total energy in an atmosphere/ocean column

$F$ ($W\,m^{-2}$)
: radiative forcing due to temperature independent processes like volcanoes, oil combustion

$R$  ($W\,m^{-2}$)
: radiative response,  net downward radiation at the top of the atmosphere due to temperature dependent processes like surface warming, sea-ice melting.

$\Delta E$, $\Delta F$ and  $\Delta R$ $(W\,m^{-2})$
: change from pre-industrial values.  The assumption is that  $\Delta E$, $\Delta F$ and  $\Delta R$
  were zero in the year 1850, and have changed since then.

## Stock and flow equation for change in  energy

The stock and flow equation for the energy in a column, given the above definitions, is:

$$
\frac{d\Delta E}{dt} =\Delta F + \Delta R
$$(eq:stock)

In words {eq}`eq:stock` says that since the year 1850 we have applied a forcing $\Delta F$ to
the earth, and it has generated a feedback response $\Delta R$.  Because of this, the
energy of the planet, $\Delta E$ is changing with time.

### Stock and flow with Planck feedback

Recall from the Day 8 Modtran worksheet that we defined the Planck feedback $f_{planck}$ as the
extra amount of upward radiative flux $-I_{up}$ that would be generated by a 1 K change in surface temperature.  That change in the upward flux means that the radiative response $\Delta R$ has to change. 

In symbols this is:

$$
\Delta R = f_{planck} \Delta T
$$(eq:delR)
where $f_{planck}$ $(W\,m^{-2}\,K^{-1})$ is called the **Planck feedback factor**.

According to page 4 of the worksheet, 

$$
f_{planck} = -5.67\ W\,m^{-2}\,K^{-1}
$$(eq:planck)

Using {eq}`eq:delR` and {eq}`eq:planck`, we can rewrite {eq}`eq:stock` as:


$$
\frac{d\Delta E}{dt} =\Delta F + f_{planck} \Delta T
$$(eq:stock2)


## Linking  the climate feedback to the climate sensitivity

In equilibrium:  $d \Delta E/dt = 0$, so {eq}`eq:stock2` becomes:

$$
\Delta F + f_{planck} \Delta T = 0
$$(eq:stock3)

or rearranging:


$$
\Delta T = -\frac{1}{f_{planck}}  \Delta F
$$(eq:stock4)

Another way to write this is:


$$
\begin{align}
\lambda &= -1/f \\
\Delta T &= \lambda \Delta F
\end{align}
$$(eq:stock5)
where $\lambda$ ($K/(W\,m^{-2})$) is called the **climate sensitivity parameter**.


### Equilibrium climate sensitivity

Finally, suppose we doubled the $CO_2$ from its preindustrial concentration of 280 ppm.  We know
from the Day 9 reading that that corresponds to $\Delta F = 3.8\ W\,m^{-2}$.  The
**equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS)** is defined as the final 
equilibrium temperature change due to $CO_2$ doubling, and from the above, if only the Planck
feedback was operating, we would get:

$$
ECS = \Delta T = \lambda \times 3.8 = \frac{1}{5.67} 3.8 = 0.7\ K
$$

In fact, $\Delta T$ will be much larger than this, because we have to include all the other
amplifying and stabilizing feedbacks that operate in addition to the Planck feedback.  This is
the topic of Chapter 6 in the textbook.

+++

